Module 3 LMA Certification Program 					Spring 2014

Animal Assignment aka Zoo Assignment: the African Elephant

Robin Neveu Brown and Susan L. Wiesner


We begin with the introduction of our animal and the process of selecting and observing this large, lovely, empathetic creature: the African Elephant. The first thing to note is the type of elephant we stipulate: genus Loxodonta Africana. Hunted (and poached) for its ivory, this elephant species is larger than the Asian elephant, has much larger ears, a different bone structure, and cannot be cross-bred with the Asian. Most elephants that we see in circuses are of the Asian genus, as they are known to be more biddable and thus easily trained (although this is debatable due to the training methods used). Further, elephants in literature (e.g. Heffalumps, Horton, Babar) also appear to be Asian elephants as they are drawn with the physical features of this genus. Interestingly (and as an aside), Dumbo has the very large ears of the African bush elephant, while the female elephants that make fun of him have the smaller ears of the Asian. Planned or an inadvertent distinction, this largest land mammal continues to amaze and inspire humans, and thus our selection.

The process of observation proved somewhat challenging as quite clearly the elephant has featured not replicated through our human form. First and foremost is, well, the trunk: 'What I realize on the first pass is that the Laban framework is too limited for the elephant’s form and movement.  The trunk particularly presents an issue. Nothing in the human form compares!  Perhaps, the arm/hand, but still, not even close!'(RNB) This difference led to some consternation; however, we did find a way to discuss the trunk, as it has what biologists consider 'fingers' (2 in fact). Further, the fact of the elephant's four limbs used for support and locomotion generated discussion regarding terminology (fore and rear or upper/lower) with the ultimate decision to use fore/rear for the legs and shoulder/pelvis for the corresponding skeletal structures (per online diagrams that include these terms). This might cause some confusion, as the skeletal structure of the 4 limbs are labeled as if they were arms and legs (e.g. femur, humerus, etc.), but it makes more sense to us to keep fore/aft and shoulder/pelvis. The motif symbols also derived from the limb and skeletal distinctions, as did other Body elements, as you will see throughout this text. Finally, our observations were made through research, viewing several full-length videos/documentaries on YouTube, Smithsonian channel, and PBS and captured in a googledoc table.

Themes

Overarching Themes became apparent immediately, with an emphasis on Mobile/Stable and Function/Expression. When locomoting these animals are generally slow moving yet Mobile on a stable base of four limbs (we likened them to a colonnade or portico, a solid structure supported by 4 supporting columns), although they can rise onto the two rear limbs when playing and asserting dominance, and they can run (forward, see Body). We even observed a baby 'hopping'. The Stability of the fore and rear limbs offer support for the extremely  Mobile trunk (which consists of 40,000 muscles, but no bones). The trunk (and tail) allow for both Function and Expression as it is the means of feeding, cooling, drinking, touching, stroking, lifting, and communicating. Example of communicating with the trunk are the trunk-to-mouth touching that 'lesser' males offer to 'leaders', the extended trunk when charging (a bluff), the curled trunk when charging (truly attacking), and the soft stroke to comfort one another (among other communiqués). So, too, can the tail communicate calm and anger, as it swings softly or slaps down (see Effort). 

We also noticed Exertion/Recuperation in some movements, specifically an aft leg lift/swing when standing (as if to relax the leg) and the exertion required to lie down (they are, after all, enormous creatures). But the most interesting Theme noted is that of Inner/Outer, a theme we came to see as indicative of their empathy and introspection. This observation generated a question regarding the notion of a boundary between inner and outer, a boundary that cannot be clearly defined through Kinesphere nor Dynamosphere, although the latter is probably more apt. As the elephant has an 'internal antenna' that extends beyond (well beyond) its physical reach space it occurred to us that the elephant might be introspective in a larger sense than we as humans are. Although they are taking in information from beyond their physical space, it is driven by Inner needs. So, too, can the elephant experience the greater world through an Outer 'knowing' and Memory. Because of these arguably philosophical discussions, we think that, as RNB states, 'the way that their senses extend beyond our own, I feel like their inner/outer boundary must be in a different relative location than ours'. This is just one more difference between humans and elephants.

Body 

Basic Body actions include change of support, flexion, extension, hyperextension, rotation (baseline rotary action in the kinetic chains of walking that show in head and neck). The trunk can articulate a spiral, or flex, or extend (as it lacks a skeletal structure, these are muscular actions). Verticality and spinal rotation (and rotation of fore and rear limbs) are noticeably missing.

The elephants exhibit overlapping – swing – phrasing, especially in their walk (per SLW: 'that’s what makes it seem timeless to me, no endings'). Impactful phrasing is exhibited when they show aggression. When locomoting, posture is emphasized as it is with freezing in response to perceived danger. Posture can also be apparent in the trunk, which is normally used for gesture, as it occasionally becomes integrated into postural actions as an extension of the posture/spine (but mostly they use their trunks to eat, cool themselves, touch one another, etc.). The ears can be used with both gesture and posture while the tail is mostly gestural. When the ears are completely out (wall-like) above a firm stance they become part of a posture, but flapping the ears to warn is gestural. The tail become gestural during confrontations, as it repeatedly strikes the air (see Effort).  

Axial movement is only apparent in the head, neck, and trunk, as the elephant does not have much rotation in the spine. For the most part, the elephants move in the sagittal plane, and turning to change direction requires a 'back-up-and-maneuver' action (similar to a 3-point turn, with lots of changes of support as their feet shift to a new 'forward' facing). As noted, locomotion is emphasized (sagittal). 

There are several instances of Head/Tail connections, such as when eating from trees with trunk/head/tail connected. This could be argued to be a Core/Distal connection, if the trunk is indeed a limb. However, with the pelvic shifts forward to accommodate the length of the spine (and the trunk outstretched), we think that this is Head/Tail. The same is true when they push trees and when pressing forward to show strength. These pelvic shifts are components of the Basic 6 exhibited by elephants, as they use sagittal pelvic shifts when pressing forward (in a push from the pelvis) and lateral pelvic shifts when walking. Thigh lifts are also observable in the rear legs, with slight lifts in the fore-legs (although the fore-legs have a 'flicking' motion of the foot when placing it, almost a 'wrist' action). Their body organization when mobile lends itself to the use body-half and contralateral movement, as the pattern is as follows: left rear leg, left fore leg, right rear leg, right fore leg, repeat, etc. Due to our perception of this being initiated in the pelvis (and shoulders) it might be clearer to say left pelvic push, left shoulder accommodation, right pelvic push, right shoulder accommodation. This pelvis-shoulder pattern is the basis for the contralateral pulls when walking, and is also demonstrated with the relaxed rear foot lift when 'relaxing' (they shift their weight slightly).

The Bartenieff Fundamentals include: Developmental pattern support - push/pull in walk, body half in walk, contralateral in walk (because of overlapping phrasing), and trunk control; Dynamic alignment; Spatial intent; Body level phrasing – walking uses overlapping phrasing; and Weight Shift from the pelvic core.

Effort life 

On a Macro level elephants' Effort life is Indulgent but with a zoomed in focus (micro level) on specific body parts, like tail or trunk, where there is a wider range of effort qualities. Reasons for discerning this indulgent Effort elements include the timelessness of overlapping phrasing.  There seem to be very few new initiations because ending and beginnings flow into one another (this is especially in their normal, forward walking patterns).  Further, they are almost always moving in sustained time as a whole entity, with the exception of quick time when charging, which contributes to the timeless 'feeling'. This would tend to place them in Spell Drive. Their delicate, almost weightless walk (as if they are indifferent to or unaware of their mass) suggests Vision drive. The tail could be said to be in Action drive, as it can have Directness and Indirectness, Lightness and Strength, and Quickness, with different constellations having different meanings of expression. The trunk could be in Action drive, as Flow is a constant underlying element. That said, we argue that the elephant's predominant effort configuration is more state-y than drive-y. 

For example, they can be ongoing through space without any awareness or attitude toward their weight or time (until they feel threatened or play with each other, of course), which places them in Remote state. So, too, does their hyper-vigilance establish a distinct use of Indirect Space, which, along with their ability to Bind and Free their Flow supports an overall attitude of Remote state. Of course, the idea of them being in Remote state as a whole being, may not apply to the trunk as the rest of the body could be in Remote while the trunk is in another state (they really do seem to have the look of multi-taskers with body and trunk doing two tasks simultaneously). The trunk can be in Remote state, but the most common uses for feeding and flipping dirt and/or water require Directness and Indirectness (respectively) and Quickness (Awake state). The trunk can also caress which is done with sustained Time and Lightness (Rhythm state). The ears can move with Space and Flow (Remote state) as they Bind them and Direct-ly open them when showing assertiveness (although this is more of a Shape thing). 

Shape

Still Forms: Through the elephant's use of extra appendages (ears, trunk, tail) they can attempt Wall, Pin, and Screw, but there’s not much they can do about their form (although the pelvic push and Head/Tail does at times become 'Pin'-like). The ears in particular can open to a Wall as they are flattened in the Vertical plane to help the elephant to appear to be larger in mass. And the trunk can stretch into a Pin as well as twist into a Screw. 

Modes of Shape Change: Elephants do exhibit Shape Flow when caring for self (e.g. splashing dirt or water on skin, lifting and swinging the rear leg, shifting weight from side to side). The trunk uses Directional Shape Change when eating from trees (spoke to arc back) and when bridging (more arc like) to objects and others elephants. However, once they engage with others they are Shaping. So, too, are they Shaping when re-arranging their environment (pushing over trees and, if in a semi-captive state, re-arranging furniture and interacting with toys).

Shape Qualities: As noted, the ears can spread and enclose, as they 'open' when becoming a Wall, but the predominant Shape Qualities are the whole body in Advance and Retreat. They also sink when going to the lie on the ground to sleep or when ill. There are discernible relationships between Shape Quality and Effort such as when sinking it can sometimes be Quick, Direct, with passive weight (such as when tranquilized) and when ill it is Sustained, Direct, with controlled Weight and/or bound flow (they are very careful when ill). 

Space

This BESS component caused the most discussion of our observations and understanding of LMA as seen through the discussion in the googledoc. And, once again, the elephant's trunk took centre stage.
Reach: 
(SLW) far when reaching for food and water (and exploring see Timba (wild/wooly) at 11:40 reach for sheep), near when feeding self, and mid when swooshing dirt and water on back. interestingly: in Battle at 51:51 we see lots of babies who exhibit near reach with one another, closeness and intimacy when playing, comforting, etc. they are in one another’s kinesphere
(RNB) Interesting concept to apply to elephants who have no arms to reach with.  (I may be oversimplifying, but reach space mostly has to do with arms, right?)  So the trunk becomes the indicator of reach space, and how that affects the spine as a whole (trunk as extension of spine?)  
(SLW) I think reach space is -- should be -- the kineshpere, how far the body can go while standing (let’s see, center of body mass and the possible space into which it can extend through any body part...so the trunk could work, in which case, far reach is possible with the trunk)
Zones and Pathways: front front front and back back (interesting that one foot often swings front/back as they rest it. I wouldn’t say central or peripheral, mostly transverse (which means they can move between planes...hmmm, is this 3-dimensional?)

1-2-3 dimensionality: 
(SLW) very planal, locomoting in the sagittal (frd/back) HOWEVER they can get 2D when jumping/lifting up front legs AND head wagging (mobius strip) is icosahedral as is the trunk movements (when they spray themselves with sand/dirt or water the trunk goes from frd-low through rt-high to almost a back-high---mid range and vice versa when going to the other side (left)). When doing this in the shower, I feel very SCALE-ish. 
(RNB) I am very confused about how to talk about Space in relation to the elephant’s form.  I have to break it down this way for myself: The elephant is 3-dimensional.  He has length, width, and depth.  But he mostly has depth (front/backness). This a WILDLY different experience with the world than we have as humans, with mostly length, because no matter what an animal has more of (length, width, or depth) gravity does not change.  So gravity acts differently on their body.  [I know it must seem like I am stating really obvious things, but it is helping me better understand.]
(together) The elephant’s specialized body parts (ears, trunk, tail,) the elephant exists in more than one spatial form.  Ears in horizontal plane, tail in vertical plane, trunk EVERYWHERE.  Because of limited core mobility and involvement, there is limited reach in back space for trunk. The elephant as a whole seems more Octahedral.

The Sequence (and Essence)
1.	Write a brief description of your sequence in terms of BF and LMA discussing your process and discoveries. Use symbols and motif writing wherever possible. Include a short vertical motif of part or all of your sequence. 
2.	Discuss how your understanding of developmental motor patterns, BF Principles, and all relevant aspects of LBMS helped you to perceive the animal’s behavior, and to perform and prepare to teach that behavior. what BF (concepts, Principles, patterns of Body Organization, etc.)  and LMA concepts you applied to your own movement to enable you to replicate this animal’s movement, and any LBMS concepts that helped you clarify your observation and movement.
3. Become aware of the Bartenieff Fundamental Principles and LMA concepts that support your human form’s rendition of the animal’s movements. In other words be aware of what you do to organize your body in trying to capture the essence of the animal’s characteristics.

